Okay. I'm gonna get started. This is a
pretty intense lecture. There's gonna be quite a
few important things that you'll learn that you'll
see pretty much throughout the next two weeks.
So hopefully you stick along with me. Essentially,
this lecture is going to be about the
React lifecycle. So how components are created, how
they're updated, and then how they're dismounted, as
well as hooks. And I'll get more into
hooks. Well, you've actually seen one before. But,
yeah. So just as a quick review, when
you're working with a component tree, there's three
main motivations for when you want to break
it down into smaller components or break a
component into smaller components. So the first is
if it's getting too long, too hard to
read. The code that you saw in the
previous workshop could all theoretically be in the
same component, but that's just not ideal. When
you're working on a large code base, you
want everything to have its own purpose. So
you want to split up large files into
smaller ones that you can work on files
one at a time and track your changes
better. And an analogy is when you're building
a house, have specific plans for each of
the rooms that you're building. And in React,
in the previous workshop, you don't want to
add the nav bar to your app component
because it serves a different purpose. The second
reason I mean, all these reasons are pretty
related, but the second reason is that these
parts or sections have different functionalities. So like
in a shopping mall, different stores have their
different purposes. So you don't want all the
source to be in the same component. You
want a store component so that you can
treat each of them differently. And in React,
comments, even though they could be stored inside
of a post component, should reside in their
own component because it's more reusable and comments
have their own functionality. And the third is
if your components like handling too many responsibilities,
To make your code more readable, you want
each component to do its own thing. So
again, it's easier to track your changes. So
in React, if your button does a lot
of back end things, like sends or sends
something to your server or it has a
lot of complicated logic, you want that component
to be maybe separate in a different file
and then you can just, like, call a
component inside the form. At the end of
the day, it's really your choice how to
design your component tree. Once you go through
our workshops, you'll get a better understanding of
like, or a better idea of like when
you want to break up a component into
smaller components or when you want to merge
components together. This just takes time and practice
and looking at examples of good code. So
a bit of practice that I'll sort of
speed through because we're running out of time.
Again, state is maintained by a component. And
it's a bit of memory that a component
maintains even after it's rendered multiple times. So
think of this as something that's persisting. It's
also mutable. We can mutate it using the
set functions that we define when we call
the useState function. And it's updated either by
us when we're interacting with the website or
via computers, or when we're interacting with different
computers. And states essentially give us control over
displaying different things in the application and actually
storing that somewhere in our code. So props
are a lot more surface level in that
they're just passed down between components. Think of
them as arguments to functions if our components
are functions. And they're not mutable, and they
only change when we update, for example, a
state in a parent component, and it's passed
down again back into a child component. That's
the only time like a prop would change,
if it's being changed somewhere up there. You
guys just saw this. This is how we
create a state. We have the value and
then the setter for that value. We call
uState, which is imported from React, and then
we create or we give it an initial
value. You guys have seen this already. So
here are some examples of using our state.
We want to have different states for each
of the things that we care about. So
persons, I guess, or people is an array.
Pets is also going to be a separate
array, a separate state. And then exists is
going to be a Boolean. So in general,
these states can take on any values. And
usually, our components are going to have lots
of different states. So again, we never want
to modify the state directly. We always want
to use the setter for the state that
we define when we call useState. Okay. Another
thing is when we're setting an array, we
usually want to do it in this way
where we destructure the initial value. So let's
say pets was an array that had three
values. All this is doing is flattening that
array or taking away those brackets. And once
we do this dot dot dot pets, this
becomes three elements within this new array. It
might be confusing, but we'll see an example
later tomorrow. And then here's a bit of
a discussion about where we actually want to
store our states inside the component tree. If
we're looking at a website, we see that
there are a few common components between these
different pages that we might view. So this
is our feed. The feed has both a
tabs component and a tweet panel component. And
notice that these components are pretty much the
same between different views of the website except
that on the left, we have the posts
highlighted. On the right, we have the likes
highlighted. And then on the left, we have
the tweets or the posts. Then on the
right, we have, like, I guess the liked
posts. So what this would probably look like
is in the tabs component on the top,
we have some state that specifies what the
selected tab is. So maybe selected tab on
the left is zero, which corresponds to the
zero index in this array of the tabs,
so posts. And then in the right, likes
is or the selected tab is probably set
to four, which would correspond to the likes
element in the tabs. Does that make sense?
And then in the tweet panel, we'd probably
have a state that stores the content type.
So on the left, it would be the
posts, and on the right, it would be
the liked posts. The problem is that there's
no coordination between the states that I just
described. If we just store the state within
tabs and then store the state within tweet
panel, when I make a change in tabs,
like when I press a different tab, how
does the tweet panel know that I want
to update what type of tab I've selected?
And the answer is I have to move
the state from the tabs in the Tweet
panel up to the parent component so that
the parent component can then propagate the changes
down to the children component because these states
are related. Right? So instead of having two
separate states, I would just put one state,
the selected tab, up into the feed. So
before encode, I would probably see, like, a
state that's content type in the sweep panel,
and then a state that's select the tab
in the tabs component. And afterwards, I would
put sort of a combined state up into
the feed called selected tab that I can
then pass down into each of the children
components using props. So in general, if you
see that you want to have states that
are connected or interacting with each other in
children components, move them up to that's, the,
some parent that's, I guess, in common for
both of them. But you don't want to
move it up all the way. Move it
to the least common ancestor, if you've learned
some algorithms before. And then once you've moved
up states to the parents, you pass down
that state value as props to the children.
And you might have to pass down the
same state as props from one child to
another child to another child if there's a
large nested structure in your component tree. So
another I guess to emphasize the point again,
you can't share states between children components directly.
You have to go through and go up
to a parent component and then pass it
down. I guess this is just like reiterating
the point. But yeah, let's take a look
again at this Twitter page breakdown. We have
lots of components. The app is the outer
component. And then within the app, we have
a nav bar, a feed, a trending page,
and a profile component. And then within the
feed, we have tweets. And within the sorry,
I guess it was suggestions, not profile. Within
the suggestions component, have profile components. And hopefully,
this tree makes a bit more sense. This
is the React component tree. We have the
app, which has these four children components. And
then the tweet is a child of feed.
Profile is a child of suggestions. So take
a moment, answer this question with the neighbors
around you. Which of the following should app
pass down as props to these components? Bringing
it back in. So the answer is we
should pass down anything that might be used
in multiple children components. So this includes blocked
users, following, and followers. And here, on these
arrows, we see which sort of props the
app might want to pass down into their
children. So into the feed, we'd probably want
to know which users we're following, which users
we have blocked, and a list of the
tweets. Into trending, we want to know our
following followers. And then into suggestions, we'd probably
want to know following followers as well as
blocked users because we don't want to see
them. So the reason that we don't want
list of tweets to be a prop inside,
or a prop that's passed from app to
feed is because it's really only used in
one place. It's only used in the feed
component. That means that we can actually just
store state or store the list of tweets
as a state in feed instead of having
a state in app that's passed down to
feed because none of the other children components
of app need the list of suites. Whereas
for the other three, we would to pass
it or we would want to store an
app and then pass the same values down
to the children components. I'll skip past this.
Any questions so far? Sorry about that. Okay.
So let's talk more about the component life
cycle. And this is how, like, state is
managed inside of React. So you can sort
of think of component rendering as a process
where that's sort of like what we see
in restaurants where there's a trigger. The trigger
happens when a customer orders something or when
we first want to or the first time
a component is called, or a trigger is
when one of the states in the component
is changed. So after this trigger, we have
the render step, which actually runs the JavaScript
code in the component. So that's all the
stuff, like, before the return statement in the
component. And then it calls all the sub
components as well that you see in the
return statement. And then commit is the last
step, which takes all of that JSX that
we just created, or that we just obtained
from the return statement, and then converts it
into HTML, or adds it to, like, the
DOM, which is the document object model. And
then this is actually just sent to the
front end or, like, the browser where we
can actually see the end results or the
HTML. So there's three steps, trigger, render, and
commit. Trigger is like when a customer orders
something, render is when the restaurant returns like
what they want to be rendered, and then
commit is when we actually serve it to
the client. So I have an example website,
and you guys can also follow along. If
you visit weblabrestaurant.herokuapp.com, I guess this website has
been around for a long time. This example
has been around for a long time. You
can see this sort of like a very,
very plain React app that has a button
called order stake. When you click order steak,
it presents this steak and you're now given
an option to send it back to the
kitchen. Right now, it's a raw steak. I
want it cooked. So I can send it
back, and then it gives me a rarestake
and then I can send it back, send
it back, and keep on going. And then
I'm actually gonna run it locally as well
just so you guys can see the code.
So the code looks like this. I have
a state component. It has a state called
doneness. Initially it's going to be zero. And
doneness is like some value that's going to
be zero, one, two, three, or five, four,
or five. And then I essentially take the
state and then render a different photo based
on what the value of the state is.
So I have like a list of these
stakes, a list of images, and then, yeah,
I just render it. I have a button.
I have an image. All of this is
actually available to you on a branch of
the skeleton code. I don't know if you
have access to that yet, but I'll add
a link to the slides. Yeah. So what
happens when we initially press the order stake
button? So when we press it, this is
the first time that we see the stake
component. Before, there's no state component here. Afterwards,
is only the first step is the trigger,
or when we press the button, the trigger
happens. And this first step is called mounting.
So mounting is when it first appears for
the first time. Afterwards, the code in the
state component is run. So all of this
JavaScript is run. And then we get the
JSX. And then afterwards, for the committing, the
HTML DOM is updated based on the JSX
that we created. And then this is actually
displayed to us on the website. So yeah,
these are the different steps. And you might
have noticed that we had this button send
back to kitchen that probably looks a lot
like the cat happiness button, where we just
had a callback function sent to kitchen that
takes the previous state, adds one, and then
sets the state to that newly incremented value.
Now, every time the state changes, so every
time doneness changes, this triggers a rerender and
we cycle again through the steps. So this
set function actually is a trigger, which leads
back into the render step and then the
commit step, which means that every time we
click the button and we change the state,
we see the updated value or an updated
component rather than the old component. So this
is just how React works. Every time we
change a state, the component's re rendered. Okay.
So what happens when we delete the stake?
Well, when we press delete stake, the component
goes away, and this is the part of
a life cycle called dismounting. So the opposite
of mounting is dismounting, essentially, when we remove
it from the document object model so that
the HTML no longer displays that component. So
that's the end of life cycle. Essentially, a
component will go through three main phases. The
first is mounting, where we have these trigger
render and commit steps. Then a state change
happens, and then we have another trigger, which
is a state update, then the render, then
the commit. And then we keep going through
these state changes, and eventually the component is
dismounted, at which point we're no longer gonna
view the component. Okay, so this is a
really important hook that we're going to discuss
now. It's called the useEffect hook. You've seen
the useState hook and useEffect is probably the
second most popular hook that you're going to
see. So hooks allow us to, like, access
different parts of the component life cycle. We've
seen that useState can update states, which trigger
re renders of our components. But sometimes use
state isn't enough for us. So here's an
example of or here's a piece of here's
a piece of code and I'll give you
a minute to read through it and at
the end, I'll ask you what this console
dot log is gonna print. So person starts
as empty. Essentially, we're setting persons to be
the array that's one element, me. Who thinks
that it's a? Show of hands. Who thinks
it's b? More hens. So the answer is
actually a. And this is really undesired behavior
because we really want it so that we
can access the new value of persons after
we've done a set state. So it's kind
of counter counter intuitive. Right? Like, we've just
set the persons or we've just set the
value of persons to be the array me,
but once we log the value of that
state, we're left with the old value and
not the new value. And this is where
we want to use the useEffects hook. And
essentially, useEffects is useful because we can do
some behavior after a state has changed. And
this is just one use of the useEffects
hook. So, yeah, we run it after, we
run some function after a specific variable changes,
and this variable is usually like a state
in our component. And you'll see a bit
of this later, but commonly this is used
to do some complicated functionality that's external to
React whenever some state changes. And the syntax
is this. We have useEffects that takes in
two arguments. The first is a function. This
can be like a callback function. And the
second is a dependency array. It's gonna be
literally an array. And this is optional, so
we can either have a dependency array or
just have one argument being the function. And
if we do have the dependency array, then
this use effect tells us that whenever anything
inside this array changes, we call this function.
Okay. So for example, we have this callback
function, or we have this function by function
that does something, and then we have three
useEffects here that all look sort of different
based on, because of the dependency array. So,
this first useEffects, and let's assume that var
one and var two are states, my function
is called both after the initial render and
after either var one or var two has
changed. And this is a pretty common use
of useEffects. I think this is probably the
first or second most common case of useEffect
that you might be using. If this dependency
array is empty, my function's only going to
be called on the first render or upon
mounting. So notice whenever a dependency array is
specified, my function will be called upon mounts.
And then if you do have something within
the dependency array, my function will also be
called whenever one of those values changes. And
then the third case is if we have
no dependency array. And this actually changes, or
this calls my function at every single rerender.
So the first time as well as when
any other state changes. So this is just
like, it always changes. Usually you won't see
it a lot because you usually want some
functionality or some function to call only when
you change some specific state. So you're only
only gonna see like the first two cases
the most often. Okay, any questions about these
three uses of useEffects? Alright. So now, instead
of having the code from before where we
try to console log persons right after we
do the set, We can have a useEffects
that takes in persons, the state, as a
dependency so that any time persons changes, the
function that's the first argument of the useEffects,
which is this callback function, is called. So
if we called the function testing stuff, it
would change persons because it adds me to
the end of it. And then it would
the useEffects would run because it sees that
persons has changed and then the console dot
log function would be called. At this point,
because it has the updated value of persons,
because it knows that it has changed, console
dot log persons is gonna print the new
value which is the array with me at
the end. And then one more thing with
the callback function that you passed into use
effects. My computer died. Yeah. Like 30 something.
Sorry about that. So if you pass a
function that has a return statement at the
end, the function at the end is actually
gonna be run whenever the component dismounts. So
you can think of it as a cleanup
function. Usually, it's gonna do something like disconnect
from an external service. If at the beginning
of the, or at the beginning of the
render, when you first mounted, you did connect
to it. We'll see an example of this
return callback function being used in a bit.
And this step deals with the dismount part
of the life cycle. Okay. Any questions? I
know this was pretty fast. Any questions about
like how useEffect works? Okay. Here are some
common patterns in React that you might see.
That's just, oh yeah. Yeah, so the question
is like, how did useEffect solve the problem
where after we set persons, we couldn't see
the updated value? Yeah, essentially set persons is
kind of has like, you're not exactly sure
like how long it'll take slash it doesn't
run immediately. And because of that, when we
call set persons and then immediately after try
to log like the thing that we supposedly
just updated, it's not gonna have the most
updated version. Whereas, if we call set persons
and then have a use effect that specifically
looks at like whenever the person's state changes,
then this is gonna recognize, oh, once it
changes, I'll have the new value so then
I can log the new value here. Yeah.
Oh yeah, so dot dot dot persons sort
of just like flattens or like takes the
elements of persons and like removes like the
array around it sort of. Yeah. So like
the end result is gonna be like still
a full array of like all the people.
It's not gonna be like one array and
then a string or something. Okay. Yeah, so
one thing that you might see a lot
is conditional rendering. So in JSX, we're pretty
much like using quote unquote HTML tags to
render stuff. And we can sort of put
these elements or reference these elements using these
curly braces to escape out of like JSX.
So if we're returning this div and we
want to have like both the header and
the content show up, even though these are
JSX elements, we can still sort of insert
them into this div by using these curly
braces. So take a minute to guess or
sort of oh, you've I think you guys
have seen this conditional rendering but just take
a minute to talk to the person around
you. What is this code doing? Like based
on the value of loading which is either
true or false, what will it display? Hopefully
you know it. When loading is true, it's
going to display the first part. So everything
between these two parentheses. And then when loading
is false, it'll display everything between the next
set of parentheses. And this is a common
structure that you'll see a lot. We'll have
this like conditional rendering that uses a ternary
statement where we have a condition that's gonna
evaluate to either true or false and then
a question mark. And between this question mark
and the colon is gonna be what we
want to render or return if the result
is true, if this condition is true. And
then what we want to render if the
condition is false after the colon. Let's get
past that. Another thing you might want to
do a lot is render an array of
data. A lot of the time you'll be
like you'll have a state that has that's
like an array of data, perhaps like a
drop down menu, like selections for that, or
a list of data items in a database.
You can use the map function that we
talked about in the morning to map elements
and arrays, to, I guess, a quick review
of map. Map, like, takes an element in
array, or takes an array and then receives
a callback function that takes an element of
the array and then returns something else. So
we saw in the morning that we could
do, like, Celsius to Fahrenheit and then map
all of these Celsius values to Fahrenheit values
by passing in a callback function that takes
a Celsius value and returns the Fahrenheit value.
So we can do the same thing or
use the same idea to map arrays, that
might not be like, renderable in React to
things that are actually renderable in React, essentially
JSX elements like divs. So if we create
a callback function that takes like an element
of an array like this that's sort of
an object and puts the item name in
a div, and I guess returns like a
div with the name inside, then we can
map the entire array to this array of
like divs using the map function. So this
would look like something like this where we
have data which is an array of objects.
And then we have this callback function that
takes an element of this array and maps
it to or returns a div that had
that uses like the the items inside the
object. And we pass that callback function into
this map function and we call data dot
map with the callback function as argument. And
all this code is essentially the same thing
as if we just returned two divs that
looked like this. And the top code is
just a lot more concise and, yeah. Easy
to understand slash you can update the data
and then don't have you don't have to
change like the return here. All you need
to do is like add elements to the
actual data state and that makes it so
that you don't have to like actually create
new divs every time your data array changes.
And a quick note about this key. The
key is used maybe it's not here. But
the key makes it so that if you
have like a unique key, React recognizes it
helps React like prevent unnecessary re renders. I
guess you don't have to worry about it
so much, but you might see it in
future workshops. Try to make it so that
all your components inside all your like JSOX
elements inside a component have different keys. Especially
when they're like very similar elements like comments
or like divs and stuff. Yeah, as a
quick exercise, like what would this code look
like if we tried to write it without
the map? It's pretty much the same thing
as before or the previous slide. It would
essentially look the same as if we had
two item components with the text passed into
here. But instead, we use map so that
we can reuse the same like logic. And
that way we don't have to write out
each of these different components. We can just
take an array with like values that we
might more commonly use and then map it
to these JSX components. And then finally, you
might see a lot of like fetching and
sending data from a server, but we'll see
more of this tomorrow. And a few minutes
just for questions. I think we're running out
of time, so the rest of this lecture
will be moved to tomorrow morning. Any questions
about maybe those last two parts like conditional
renderingmapping in JavaScript? Okay. If not, happy we'll
give some announcements. So today's really gonna be
a lot of recap about React. We're gonna
start with components, looking at like the use
state hook. Then we're gonna talk about a
new concept called the React Virtual Dom. And
that leads us into the component life cycle.
I think I referenced the DOM yesterday while
explaining the component life cycle. I realized I
probably should have talked about it before because
it's quite important to know in order to
have the proper context for the component life
cycle. And then, finally, we'll look one more
time at useEffects. And then, to combine all
of the knowledge that we learned, we're gonna
walk through an example of creating a React
app from scratch, and we'll implement a simple
timer that uses useState, useEffects, and then has
nested components. Everything that you might see in
a standard app will be in the app
that we create, hopefully. So a quick recap
about React components. Essentially, at a very surface
level component is a very powerful HTML element.
You've seen HTML elements before on day one.
We can have like buttons and closes the
text click me and it's gonna look something
like that. And in React, to create a
button in our UI, it's gonna be very
similar. The way we do it is we
create a function called whatever we want, like
button, that at the end returns some element,
and this eventually renders into the same thing
that we would see if we did it
in HTML. So let's analyze the components of
a component again. First, I really want to
emphasize that components are JavaScript functions. They're not
classes. If you ever search up React documentation
online, you're probably gonna get a lot of
conflicting feedback about what components are supposed to
look like. In old React, components used to
be defined as classes. It would be like
class button extends React component or something like
that. Nowadays, components are always gonna be functions,
and it just makes React much faster, and
it's really just the standard now. And it
doesn't matter if you use a callback in
the way that this is being defined, or
if you do something like function button with
the open and close parentheses. It's going to
mean the same thing. And then the other
key part is that components use JSX, which
is similar to HTML, but it's not exactly
HTML. One key difference that you might have
seen before was that instead of class, you
use class name, And then also inside JSX,
you can escape and have JavaScript code, whereas
in HTML, you can't really do the exact
same thing. And then components are powerful because
within the component, declaring it and then telling
it what to render, we can have a
lot of complex logic. The most common piece
of logic that you'll see is storing state.
State is like a piece of memory that
resides within a component, and after it renders,
state persists. So, that makes it so that
we can have a consistent piece of memory
that we can do other stuff with, for
example, the use effects hook that we saw
yesterday. And this is something that HTML just
really struggles to do. It's very complicated to
have state in HTML. And yeah, this is
one of the main reasons why React is
so powerful. Looking at the useState hook, hopefully,
you're familiar with this by now. We have
the state declared here. We have the state
set function declared here. This is an array
with two elements, and uState with an initial
value with whatever you want it to be
evaluates to an array with two elements where
the first one is the state, the second
one is the function. So this is how
you create a state in React. And now,
let's take a look at the bottom of
the component where we return. So, components are
always gonna be made up of JSX elements,
which are pretty much like the HTML elements,
as well as other components. Only these two
types. So, what this means is that if
you sort of think of like a component
being a parent then its children are all
of the elements that are rendered by it,
all of its children are either gonna be
JSX elements and components. So recursively, if you
go all the way down a tree, eventually
all the leaves should be JSX elements. You
shouldn't have any components in the leaves. And,
yeah. So, React is really powerful because you
can nest components within other components. In this
simple example, we have the button that we
saw before being nested inside a form. And
to render the form, what we do is
we first render this JSX element, which is
a header that just looks like that. And
then we recursively render any components inside this
component. So we recursively render button, and button
renders as just the JSX element that's button,
so it looks like that. And the key
thing to remember is these components are all
functions. So when we render something, essentially all
we're doing is running the function that defines
the component. So when we render form, we're
running this entire function, and at the end,
we're returning a value, but to determine what
this value actually is, we have to resolve
what the value of button is. And then,
going to the definition for button, we have
another function that we run or call, and
then we get a return value for that,
and then we get that return value and
place it where this is, and then we
keep propagating up until we can get a
full return value that's not consisting of any
components and only JSX elements. Any questions so
far? Okay. So remembering this nesting structure, let's
now visit the React Virtual Dom. Previously, we've
seen React component trees, which is like a
tree structure that shows the relationships between parent
and children components. And notice that this tree
doesn't have any JSX elements, and that's just
because we usually only care about the relationships
between components, because between components we're passing down
props, and that's where a lot of our
logic in the app is gonna be in.
We don't care a lot about passing down
props or, I guess, passing down values into
JSX elements because usually that's a lot more
surface level. So our component trees are gonna
be all components, whereas React's virtual DOMs are
gonna be different, where it's gonna be all
JSX elements, and we'll see that in a
bit. Let me first explain what a DOM
is. It's a document object model, So the
way to remember is it's a model that
shows or represents the objects that comprise of
a document. So what is a document? Well,
a document in the context that we're speaking
in is just like the website that you
see or the web page that you see.
So this is probably like an HTML, like
if I open Google, for example, this is
a website, and all these HTML elements can
be represented using a DOM format. At the
very top, we have document, and then we
have the HTML root element, and we have
head and body, as we saw before, and
then head as title and so on. And
we can sort of more cleanly represent this
as a tree like this. The DOM isn't
exactly the same as HTML. DOM is just,
I think, like a more general sort of
data structure, but you can use DOM to
represent HTML, and similarly, you can use DOM
to represent your React components. So React creates
a virtual DOM of all of your components
whenever it renders to the website or to
the browser. So virtual DOM is virtual because
React uses it internally. It's not exactly the
same DOM that gets displayed on the browser.
The browser has its own DOM, but we'll
see why React wants to keep track of
its own virtual DOM in three sections. To
create the virtual DOM, essentially just recursively renders
each component from the root, and then, let's
say component x has these JSX elements, but
then also calls or has this component a
nested in it, then component a probably resolves
into these five JSX elements, and that's how
we get this virtual DOM for the component
x. Okay. So, hopefully, that's enough context now
for us to talk about the component life
cycle. There are three steps, or three phases.
The first is mounting, the second is updating,
and then the third is dismounting. So think
of it sort of as like the first
and third steps are like opposites of each
other, and then the second step is like
a phase where we're just sort of in
a limbo and repeating. Sometimes you'll see this
mounting called unmounting online. Yeah, so mounting is
the process of adding a component to the
DOM or the virtual DOM. So let's say
our virtual DOM initially looks like this. Mounting
is a phase where we add a component,
let's say component a, to the virtual DOM
so that it now looks like this. And
then updating is whenever we still have the
component, it's not gone yet from the virtual
DOM, but we change parts of it, and
these are caused by triggers, which cause re
renders, which cause the virtual DOM to change
for that component, which causes the entire virtual
DOM to change. So this is usually when
or the phase that our components usually stay
in. Oftentimes, we have a state that changes
within a component, and every time we change
the state, it's not like the component's dismounted
and then mounted again. It's just updated, and
React does that so it doesn't have to,
like, do all the work of dismounting, mounting,
dismounting, mounting every time a state or a
prop changes. And then the last step is
dismounting, which is when it actually is removed
from the React Virtual DOM. Okay. So, I
want you to take a minute to visit
this website again, weblabrestaurant.herokuapp.com. And I'll pull it
up. And see if you can, like, identify
the places where a component's being mounted, where
it's in the updating phase, and then where
it's being dismounted. So for the sake of
time, I'll just go through it. So to
help me, I guess, provide evidence that it's
actually being mounted slash just mounted, I'm gonna
right click and then press inspect and then
go to elements. This shows us the browser's
HTML that it's rendering. And I'm gonna expand
this div so that we can see all
of the inner components or the inner elements.
Okay. So now I'm gonna press the order
stick button, And notice that this div appeared.
This div wasn't here earlier, and this is
probably indicative that the component that this is
being rendered by just got mounted, and it
just got added to the dom, which is
why it's showing up in the HTML file.
Pressing this button triggered the mounting phase, and
then now when I press this new button
inside the component, my guess is that a
state is changing within the component, which is
causing the component to be in the update
phase. So it's re rendering every time I
press this button. And then finally, when I
press delete stake, notice that this div is
gonna disappear. And this is pretty good evidence
that now that component was just dismounted. And
actually, yeah, we'll just leave it at that.
Any questions about that? Okay. So, I have
a question. There's a word that I'm looking
for, but does anyone know what causes a
component to enter a different phase? It was
a word that was brought up yesterday. Yes?
Yeah, exactly. So, the term that we use
to describe all the events that cause a
component to enter a phase is triggers. And
these are the most common triggers that you're
gonna see. So the first is whenever you
open up a website, React is gonna tell
you to render the root element, which is
usually app or something, and then it renders
all of its children, which renders so all
the components render in the very beginning, and
that's called the initial render. And that's when
a trigger is gonna happen because a lot
of these components are being mounted. And then
another case is when one of its ancestors
re renders, and we saw this with form,
form and button, where button was a child
of form. Whenever one of your ancestor re
renders, all of its children are going to
re render, and all of their children are
gonna re render. So eventually, if it's your
ancestor, then you're gonna also re render. Now,
there are ways of avoiding this. As you
might suspect, this is pretty expensive. If we
just wanted to change a state inside the
app component, that would mean that we would
have to change all of the children components,
which seems pretty expensive, not good for responsiveness
and stuff. So in the future, we'll see
different callback functions, or sorry, not callback functions,
different hooks that can be used so that
we don't have to re render it every
time an ancestor changes. And the two most
common things that you'll see, at least in
the scope of an individual component, is that
when one of its states changes, it's going
to rerender. This is going to be a
trigger for rerendering, as well as when a
prop that's passed from a parent to the
child changes, or from a parent to itself
changes, then it's also gonna rerender. A lot
of the times, these cases are the same
because a lot of the times, from parents,
you're passing down states of the parent as
props. When the state of a parent changes,
that causes the parent to rerender, which causes
you to rerender, which is the same thing
as when, or it happens at the same
time as the prop changing because the prop
was the state that was being passed on.
Okay. So what's the term for creating the
virtual DOM at each phase? Does anyone know
this? I've said it a lot of times
in the lecture. Like re rendering or rendering.
I guess the question wasn't too clear, but
yeah. Rendering is just essentially running the functions
or running the components and creating all the
JSX elements that it's comprised of. So, we've
looked at rendering before, but just again, if
we have this sort of this is like
a component tree. If we suppose that a
state and inspiration generator, this component changes, That's
a trigger that causes this component to rerender.
Specifically, we look at the state where or
we look at the component where the state
resides. We don't go up all the way
into the tree to rerender the entire app.
That's too expensive. So React looks at where
the state resides so that we can render
or rerender as little as possible. So we
look, we see that the state resides in
Inspiration Generator, And then because its children are
here, they need to be re rendered as
well. So that's a trigger for them to
re render. And yeah, I think we've seen
this a lot. And last question, there's one
more keyword for when React transfers the virtual
DOM to our browser. Does anyone know what
this is? Close. Serving, yeah. It's similar to
that. I think it's like the same meaning.
It's anonymous. Anyone? It's committing. Yeah, so committing
is just like, essentially it's taking the diff.
And hopefully this diagram helps. It looks at
the real DOM, which is owned by the
browser. So Chrome owns its own DOM, which
it uses to show the HTML or create
the HTML. And then React has its virtual
DOM, and these are like the JSX elements
or whatever. But you can see them side
by side and compare them. And during the
commit step, React will look at the difference
between these two DOMs and then identify the
difference or the places where they're different. And
all of the places where they're different is
called the diff. And then React is pretty
smart. It knows that all it has to
do is only modify the parts where it's
different, so it's only gonna modify the real
DOM objects inside the diff to have the
new updated values. So, if this was the
old real DOM, the new real DOM will
just reflect whatever the virtual DOM is, and
this concludes the last step of React sending
stuff to the browser, rendering stuff. And then
once the real DOM changes, there's a last
step called painting, which the browser does, which
converts this real DOM to HTML, but that's
not too important. So the takeaway is that
we can sort of look at the component's
life cycle as three phases, mounting, updating, and
dismounting. And then these transitions are marked by
three steps. Something happens, which is the trigger,
which causes the rerender, which creates the React
DOM, and then React takes the React DOM,
compares it with the real DOM, and then
commits the changes essentially to the real DOM.
So between every transition, we see a trigger,
render, and commit, But at a broader level,
we have these three phases. Does that clear
up some confusions about the life cycle from
yesterday? Any questions? Okay. And then, really quick
recap of useEffects. UseEffect takes in two arguments.
UseEffects, in broad terms, is a hook that
does something when an event occurs. And we
usually place that at the top of an
element underneath useState, but above everything else. But,
yeah, a useEffect takes two arguments, the first
being a callback function and the second being
a dependency array that's optional. And I've changed
these, like, terminologies here, but hopefully this makes
more sense now that we know the life
cycle. But for this useEffects, where we have
a dependency array of two states, var one
and var two, this callback function, my function,
is called on the mount of the component,
as well as every time the states var
one and var two change. Essentially, on every
render or re render where var one and
var two have changed. And the second use
of useEffects, where we only want it to
happen on mounts, is just passing in an
empty dependency array, which means that this function
is only called once at the very first
render. And then if we don't pass in
any dependency array, this means that this function,
my function, is gonna be called every time
the component re renders. Okay. Any questions about
useEffects? And we'll play around with it. I
will skip past this. Essentially, useEffects is quite
useful because suppose that we have a lot
of complex code that we want to execute
only once, once a component is mounted, like
the first time, we could just use useEffects.
And then what type of dependency array would
we want to pass it if we want
it to only happen once upon mount? Anyone?
Yeah. Exactly. We would use an empty dependency
array so that all the hard work is
done only on the first mount. Another reason
why it's useful is because, as we saw
in the example from yesterday, like, functions for
states aren't exactly, like, intuitive because they don't
happen right after they're called. So if we
do this, where we append a value to
the end of an array, the state's not
actually gonna be updated. It's not gonna have
me at the end. So the better way
to do it is have a useEffect that
takes persons as a dependency and then do
some functionality with that. Okay. I think I
can run through this in ten minutes. Okay.
Hopefully, is helpful, but I wanted to show
you guys how to create a blank React
app because you guys have, like, the you
guys have seen the workshop code, but you
don't you might not know exactly where it
came from. And one second. I'm just gonna
change the screens. Okay. So I'm just gonna
do it on my end. You don't need
to follow along. It's probably better if you
don't follow along so you can actually see
what's going on. But I'm gonna create a
blank react app and then implement a stopwatch
that looks like this, where we can toggle
the clock and then the time just runs
every one second and increments. And this will
use use state, use effects, everything that we
learn. So in my terminal, I'm just gonna
create or run the commands. Sorry. One second.
Okay. I'm here. Okay. There we go. So
in my terminal, I'm gonna run npm creates
veets at latest. Oh. Okay. Can you guys
see it? Okay. So in some random directory,
I'm running npm create v at latest. V
helps us create React apps. Project name, I'm
just gonna call it test two. Select a
framework, I wanna use React. I'll use a
standard JavaScript React project. And then now, if
I look at my directory, see test two.
So I'm gonna change directory into it. I
see that it's populated with a lot of
files. That's great. And then I'm just gonna
open up up the the code now. You
guys see that? Okay. So I'll open up
a terminal. First step, whenever you create a
new project, is to run npm install. You
guys already did that with Catbook, so you
probably don't need to for a long time.
In the meantime, I'm gonna open up app
dot jsx and main dot jsx. And what's
really important to see is that in main,
actually even higher up, I'm gonna go to
index dot html. So any time you create
a React app, essentially it's serving an HTML
file as well as lots of JavaScript files
to define, like, how to, like, manipulate that
HTML file. And it's so abstracted that the
only JavaScript file we're passing is main dot
JSX into this HTML file. Now that I've
installed, I'm gonna run npm run dev. And
then in my local host 5173, I should
be able to see this blank react app.
But, yeah. So if I right click here
and then look at the HTML, I can
actually see that this is the same exact
index dot HTML that I'm sending over that
I have in my code base here. And
it has the same source equals source main
dot j s x. This tells us that
all of the React logic is being somehow
taken from main dot jsx and then put
into this HTML file. So how exactly is
it doing it? It's taking or React takes
the document and then finds the ID or
the element with the ID root. And if
we look here in the HTML here, the
div that's like the innermost div for body
is actually the one with ID root. So
what that means is React is creating a
root within that div by finding the div
and then rendering the app component. So this
is the connection point between React and HTML.
You don't actually have to deal with this
a lot or actually ever. Once you know
this, you can comfortably understand like, okay, I
know that my app is being rendered so
all I have to do is change how
app is implemented and then I can render
whatever whatever I want on the website. So
that's what's happening right now. We have all
this code here that I'm just gonna get
rid of. I'm also gonna get rid of
the CSS. I'm gonna create a very simple
timer, and I'll just put it inside app.
First step is gonna be having a time
state. Sorry. Maybe I shouldn't do this. Let
me create a new file called stopwatch dot
JSX. Inside here, to define a component, I
just say const stopwatch equals a callback function.
Inside this callback function, I'm going to have
some JSX. And then at the end of
the file, I have to export default stopwatch.
Sorry. This is so fast. But here, to
render stopwatch, I'm just gonna go import stopwatch
from the same directory and then I'm gonna
return stopwatch. Okay. So if I refresh this
page now, I see hi, which is great.
Let me get rid of this this CSS
inside main. But yeah. What I eventually want
is this. I won't implement the toggle for
now. I'm just gonna implement the stop watch.
And the first step is to create a
state for the time because this time is
gonna be displayed to the UI. So const
time set time equals use state and then
the initial value is zero, so I put
a zero here. It's yelling at me because
it doesn't know what use state is, so
import use state. And then I always just
press the first option because it usually does
it fine. So what I want to happen
is on the first render, it starts incrementing
the time. Now there's two ways to do
this and I'll show you the fast way
to do it. I'm gonna use the use
effects or first off, let me just like
render time. If you yeah. You see here
it's just always gonna be zero because we're
not actually setting it. But now, let's create
a useEffects. So the first argument is a
callback function. And the second argument is a
dependency array. I'll import useEffects. Oh, thanks. Yeah.
Okay. So, yeah. I set I have the
use effects and I'm gonna use time as
the dependency. And this is a function that
you haven't seen before, it's or you probably
haven't seen before. It's set interval and it
takes in a callback as well as a
time. And essentially all it does is like
it runs this callback after this number of
milliseconds. So inside here, if I did like
console dot log hi or whatever, it would
like print this after a thousand milliseconds or
one second. Yeah, inside of the set interval,
I want to somehow update my time or
increment my time. And to do that, I
have to use my set time. I can't
just do time plus plus or something. I
do set time and then time plus one
because I take the old value, add one
to it, and then set that to be
the new state value. If I do this
now, the timer is working fine. To explain
what this is doing again, I have a
state that's initialized to zero. So when I
refresh the page, it's gonna start at zero.
And then every time time is changed, as
well as on the first mount or the
first render, this callback function is run. This
callback function runs, or calls set interval, which
after one second runs this callback function, which
sets the time to one more than it
used to be. So on the first render,
time is gonna be zero. It's going to
run this callback function immediately because it just
mounted. And then it's gonna wait one second
and then set time to zero plus one
or one. And at that point, because time
has changed to one now, the component's gonna
rerender because one of its states has changed.
And the useEffect sees that one of its
dependencies time has changed from zero to one,
which then runs its callback function again. And
then it sets time to two, and then
it sees the time has changed again, so
it sets time to three, and so on.
Every time with a thousand milliseconds between it,
Which is why, yeah, which is why we
see the timer commencing by one every one
second. Okay. I've run over. Any questions about
this though? Okay. Cool. I guess I don't
have a slide for it, but you can
look at the completed code here. This uses
a different implementation. And you can also read
the recap. Guess this entire lecture was a
recap. Yeah. If you wanna fill out weblab.
Isfeedback, that'd be great and then we'll get
started with workshop two.